you know , one of the great minds of traveling and one of the pleasures about ethnography is to live with the people who remember the old days , who still feel their past , they touch stones on the rain , they taste it in the bitter sheets of plants .
just knowing that jaguar schames are still traveling beyond the milky way , or the oldest meaning of the myths of the elders of the inuit still full of meaning , or that in the himalayas , the buddhist still follow the breath of the dharma means to successfully emulate the central openness of anthropology , that is the notion that the world that we live in is not in an absolute sense , but as a model of reality , as a consequence of a certain set of adaptation that effectively wasted our number of generations .
and of course , we all share the same kind of adaptability .
we &apos;re all born . we &apos;re bringing children to the world .
we go through initiation rituals .
we have to deal with the awkward separation of death , so it shouldn &apos;t surprise us that we all sing , dancing and art should create .
but what &apos;s interesting is the unique case of the song , the rhythm of dance in every culture .
but it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s the penan in the borneo forests , or the voodoo akolyths in haiti , or the warriors in the caisut desert of northern kenya , the curanderos in the front of the sahara , and this is the colleague that i came to the desert a month ago , or even an yaki dealt with the qomi desert , everest , the mother &apos;s god &apos;s mother &apos;s disease .
all these people teach us that there are other possibilities of existence , other ways of thinking , different ways of orienting on earth .
and this is an idea that , if you think about it , can only fulfill you with hope .
together , the countless cultures of the world form a web of spiritual and cultural life that wraps up the earth and is as important for the sake of the earth as the biological food web you know as a biosphere .
you can think of this cultural web as an ethnosphere , and ethnosphere can be defined as the total sum of all the thoughts and dreams and myths , ideas , inspiration and intuitions that have been generated by the human imagination since the beginning of consciousness .
the ethnosphere is the great legacy of humanity .
it &apos;s the symbol of all of what we are and what we are capable of as an amazing white species .
and just like the biosphere was highly decommissioned , this happened with the ethnosphere -- only at even greater speed .
no biologist would say , for example , that 50 percent or more of all species are just about to extinct because it &apos;s just not true , and yet , this -- the most apocalyptic scenario in the field of biodiversity -- corresponds to almost what &apos;s known to us as an optimistic case in the field of cultural diversity .
and the crucial indicator of this is the extinction of languages .
when each of you in this room were born , 6,000 languages were spoken on earth .
now , a language is not just the full of vocabulary or a series of grammatical loans .
a language is expression of the human mind .
it &apos;s a means that it can find the soul of a certain culture access to the physical world .
each language is like an old-growth forest of the mind , an inflection point , an idea , an ecosystem of spiritual possibilities .
and of those 6,000 languages today , while we &apos;re sitting here in monterey , just half of them won &apos;t be whispered into the ears of children .
they &apos;re not taught little kids anymore . that means , if nothing is done , they &apos;re actually dead .
what could be more lonely than being huddled by silence , one of the last people to speak to your language , have no way to pass the wisdom of the ancestors , or to expect hope to children ?
and yet , this horrible fate is actually happening to someone on earth somewhere , about every two weeks , because every two weeks , an elderly person dies and takes the last syllabus of an old language .
and i know some of you say , &quot; well , isn &apos;t it better ? &quot; the world wouldn &apos;t be a better place if we &apos;d all talk only one language ? &quot; and i say , &quot; well , let that language be yoruba . let them be canisian .
let them be existential . &quot;
and then suddenly you would see what it would be like if you couldn &apos;t speak your own language .
so today , i want to take you on a journey across the ethnosphere , a short trip across the ethnosphere , to try and understand what actually happened .
now , there are some of us who are sort of forgotten that when i say , &quot; different possibilities of being , &quot; i mean really different possibilities of being .
so for example , take this kid from the barasana in the northwest of the amazon , the people of anakonda , believe that they came up with a milky milky stream from the east in the belly of sacred snakes .
this is a people that don &apos;t cognitively distinguish between color blue and green , because the celestial scene is matched by the forest that people depend on .
they have a strange language , and a marriage headline is called the linguistic exogamy : you have to marry someone who speaks a different language .
all of this is rooted in the mythological past , and the strange thing about these big houses , because of the mischievals , six or seven languages , but it &apos;s that you never hear anyone who learns a language .
you just listen and then you start talking .
or , one of the most intriguing tribes i &apos;ve ever lived with , the orani in the northeast of ecuador , an amazing people who have been contacted in 1958 .
in 1957 , five missionary contacts tried to connect and made a severe mistake .
they threw down shiny photos of themselves in the air , which we would call a friendly gesture , and they forgot that these people from the rainforest in their lives had never seen anything two-dimensional .
they lifted up these photographs from the forest floor , tried to see behind the face or the character , nothing and concluded that these were business cards of the devil and killed the five missionaries with the spear .
but the waorani not only killed the outside with the spear .
they drilled through each other .
54 percent of the deaths were through drills .
we went back to geneaology eight generations and found two cases of a natural death death , and when we asked people something about it , they assigned that one of the people had gotten so old that he died because of their age , and we killed him anyway with the sheer .
but at the same time , they had a clear awareness of the forest that was amazing .
their hunters could smell the urine of an animal from 40 steps away and determine what kind of animal owned by this animal .
in the early &apos; 80s , i got a really amazing task when my professor at harvard asked if i was interested in going to haiti and infiltrating the secret societies that were the foundation of duvalians and clay macoutes and the poison that was used to make zombies safe .
of course , to make sense of this sensation , i had to know something about this remarkable faith in the vodoun and voodoo is not a cult of black magic .
on the contrary , it &apos;s a complex metaphysical view of the world .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i asked you to count the great world religions , what would you say ?
christentum , islam , buddhism , judaism , whatever .
a continent is always abandoned , because the guess was that in sub-saharan africa , there was no religious faith . of course , one and voodoo was just the remain of this very profound religious thought that came over during the tragic diaspora of slavery .
but what makes voodoo so interesting is this vivid relationship between the living and the dead .
the living bears the spirits .
the spirits can be complained by underwater , answers to the rhythm of the dance to excavate the soul of the living , so the acolyth becomes a very short shiny moment to god .
so , the voodoodooists like to say , &quot; your white goes to church and talk about god .
we dance in the temple and become god . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed , you &apos;re taken by the mind . how can you be harmed ?
look at these amazing demonstrations : voodoo akolyths in a trancestate , the glowing coal without burning , an astonishing illustration of the ability of the mind to influence the body in such a way that it holds when it &apos;s replaced into a state of extreme arousal .
well , of all the people i &apos;ve met , the chicago i was from the sierra nevada de santa marta in northern colombia , the most extraordinary .
descending the ancient tyrannian civilization that populated the caribbean shoreline of colombia , and as a result of conquest , these people moved back into an isolated volcanic massively that rises across the caribbean coastal plain .
in a bloodshed continent , these people were the only ones that were never conquered by the spaniards .
to this day , they &apos;re governed by a ritual priesthood , but education to priesthood is very extraordinary .
the young acolyths are separated from their families from the age of three to four , and in a shadow world of the frozen star , in stone huts at the foods of the glacier for 18 years , and two times nine years , intentionally chosen to mimic the nine months of pregnancy that they spent in the lap of their arbitrary mother , now they &apos;re spending metamoric in the lap of the great mother .
and all that time , they &apos;re culturally introduced to the values of their society , values that sustain the claim that their prayers and only their prayers , the cosmic -- or we could say the ecological balance .
at the end of this amazing initiation , they &apos;re all taken out one day , and for the first time in their life , age 18 , they see a sunrise . and in this crystal moment of consciousness , when the sun begins to shine on the hands of the amazingly beautiful landscape , all of a sudden , what they learned in the abstract confirms . and the priest comes back and says , &quot; do you see ? it &apos;s really how i told you .
it &apos;s so wonderful . you have to protect it . &quot;
they call themselves the older brothers and say that we are responsible for the younger brothers to destroy the world .
now this level of intuition becomes very important .
whenever we think about born and landscape , we either complain rousseau and the old framework of noble wild herds , which in its simplification is a racial thought , or otherwise thoreau and say , these people are more connected to nature than we do .
so , indigenous people are not sentimental , nor are they being picked by nostalgia .
there &apos;s not a lot of space for this in the malaria swamp of asmat or the cold winds of tibet , but they still have , through time and ritual , shaped a mysterious nimbus of the earth that doesn &apos;t come up with the idea of being consciously close , but on a far more subtle intuition , the idea that the earth can only exist because it can be attributed to human consciousness .
now , what does that mean ?
it means that a little kid from the andes who believes that the mountain is an apu spirit who can determine his or her destiny will become a very different person , and have a different relationship with this resource or this place , as a small child from montana who grows up believing that a mountain is a bunch of stones that can be carried .
whether it &apos;s a place of mind or a lot of heritage is irrelevant .
what &apos;s interesting is the metaphor that defines the relationship between the individual and the nature .
i grew up in the forests of british colombia and i believed that those forests were there to be owed .
and that made me think to another person than my friends under the kwakiutl who believe that these woods of cake &apos;s locations and the curved hive snibaleen and the cannibalal spirits that live in the northern world , spirits that they would be involved in their shark initiation .
well , if you start to look at the idea that these cultures can create different realities , you can understand some of their extraordinary discoveries , like this plant here .
it &apos;s a photograph i took just last april in the northwest of the amazon .
this is ayahuasca , which many of you have heard of , the strongest psychoactive imperative parate from the repertoire of the shaman .
what ayahuasca does so intriguing is not just the pharmacological potential of that preparate , but that processing . it &apos;s actually made out of two different sources . on the one hand , there &apos;s this wooden liane that &apos;s going to be a series of betaki beds , harmin , harmolin , slightly hallucinating , this climber plant alone is kind of like a blue tryer on its consciousness , but it &apos;s going to be with a petals from the family &apos;s named the effect of the psychics .
this plant contains some very strong tryptamins that are very similar to the serotonin , dimethylytamin 5 and methoxydimethylydimethylydimethylydimethylytamin .
if you &apos;ve seen the yanoma ma sniffing this stuff , this substance that they make from different species also has methoxydimethylydimethylytamin .
this powder is about as much as being shot out of a rifle , blinded by baroque paintings and landing on a sea of electricity .
it &apos;s not a distortion of reality ; it &apos;s a reality resolution .
i even have been discussing with my professor , richard evan shultes , the man who had the psychedelic erea discovering the magic mushroom in mexico in the 1930s , discussed it . i would argue that you couldn &apos;t hire these tryptamins as a hallucinatory gene , because the moment you feel that you &apos;re not there anymore to experience a hallucination .
but the thing about tryptamins is that they can &apos;t be picked up on the fly , because of course , through a human gut , the enzyme that comes from name monoxidase , denaturized .
they can only be incorporated with some other chemicals that mao denatulate .
now , what &apos;s fascinating is that the betakarboline , which is contained in the liane , are mao-inhibitors of exactly the way that &apos;s needed to potentially enforce tryptamins . so , ask yourself .
how can these people from a flora of 80,000 species of adstrinous plants find these two morphologically unrelated plants that , when combined this way , create a kind of biochemical version , make the whole thing bigger than the sum of its parts ?
we use this great euphemism , try and error , which turns out to be meaningless .
but you ask the indians , they say , &quot; the plant speaks to us . &quot;
so , what does that mean ?
this tribe , the cofan , has 17 varieties of ayahuasca that you all recognize in the forest at large distances that seem to be a species for our eyes .
and then you ask them , &quot; how do they justify their taxonomy and they say , &quot; i thought you &apos;d understand some plants .
i mean , you know nothing at all ? &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so it turns out you take each one of the 17 varieties at the full moon and you sing them into one of the different tons .
now , that doesn &apos;t give you a harvard ph.d. , but it &apos;s much more interesting to count than tribal .
well , the problem is that even those of us who have sympathy for the difficult situation of infants , they look at it as orginial and colorful , but they kind of constrained to the past , while the real world , means that our world , is progressing our world .
so , the fact is that in the 20th century , 300 years , you will remember not for your wars or technological innovations , but rather , more than an era where we were and the massive destruction of biological and cultural diversity on earth either actively adopted or passively accepted . so the problem is not change .
all cultures have been involved again and again in dance with new possibilities of life .
and the problem is not technology itself .
the sioux indians did not hear less being on sioux when they were bow and arrow , when the americans stopped being americans , when they were horsing and horsing tasks .
not change and technology threaten the integrity of the ethnosphere ; it &apos;s power ; ugly face of rule .
and wherever you look around the world , you &apos;ll find that these cultures are not diminished . these are dynamic living peoples whose existence is displaced by visible forces that are beyond their capacity of adaptation , and whether it &apos;s the immense deforestation in the home of the penan land , a people from south eastern canopy , a population of sarawak , a people who have been freely living in the forest , now , and prostitutes prostitution , at the point of searching , where they can see that there &apos;s a floating environment where they seem to be very , very , very small , very small , very small , very , very small , very , very small in the forest of the surface of the surface of the surface of the surface , and that they can see that there , and see that there &apos;s a little bit of the surface of the surface of the surface of the trees that there , and the surface
or if we go to the mountains of tibet , where i recently get a lot of desks , you &apos;ll see the ugly face of political dominance .
you know , the genocide , the physical extinction of people is generally convicted , but the ethnocid , the destruction of people &apos;s lives , is not only convicted , but generally and many are celebrated as part of a development strategy .
and you can &apos;t understand the suffering of tibetans if you haven &apos;t experienced it at the lower level .
once i went to lhasa with a young colleague , 6,000 miles from chengdu to west china , through southeast tibet to lhasa , and first of all , when i came to lhasa , i saw the face behind the statistics you hear : 6,000 sacred monuments that were turned into rubble and ash , 1.2 million people who were murdered during the cultural revolution .
this young man &apos;s father was identified as the follower of the panel lama .
that meant he was instantly killed during the chinese invasion .
his uncle flew with her holiness into the diaspora that brought people to nepal .
his mother was locked in as a punishment for -- for the crime to be wealthy .
he was muggled into jail at age two to hide under her rock panel , because she couldn &apos;t live without him .
the sister who gave this brave act was taken into a education camp .
and one day , they stepped out of sight to a armband of maos , and for that transition , she had to go to a heavy labor camp for seven years .
suffering tibets can be intolerable , but the inexhausting spirit of people is something unforgettable .
and in the end , we &apos;re really in front of a choice . do we want to live in a monotonomous world of diversity or in a polychromatic world ?
margaret mead , the great anthropologist , before she died , said it &apos;s her greatest fear that while we were moving towards a thread , unstable , generic view of the world , we would see not just the entire range of human imagination reduced in a minded mindset , we would one day wake up from a dream and forgotten that there were ever other possibilities .
and it &apos;s humbling to think that maybe our species has existed for 600,000 years .
the neolithic revolution that brought us agriculture and created us at this moment the cult of the saatkorn , the poetry of the shaman through the prose of priesthood and hierarchy , specialization and overshot -- occurred just 10,000 years ago .
the modern industrial world as we know it is almost 300 years old .
now , this shallow story doesn &apos;t tell me that we have all the answers to the challenges that we face in the ensuing millennia .
if we ask these countless world cultures about the importance of being human , they respond to 10,000 different voices .
and in this song , we &apos;re going to be able to rediscover what we are , people with full awareness who are aware of the importance of all humans and gardening have to thrive a space , and there are great moments of optimism .
here &apos;s a photograph that i took up at the north end of the baffin islands , when i went to the narwhal jagd with inuits , and this man , olaya , told me a wonderful story of his grandfather .
the canadian government didn &apos;t always go very well with the inuit , and over the 500s , the establishment of our rule , they were forced to move into settlements .
this old man &apos;s grandfather refused .
the family that was afraid of his life took all the weapons and all the tools .
now you have to know that the inuit is not afraid of the cold ; they used it to benefit it .
the likeliers of their slices were originally made out of fish incorporated in cartoon skin .
the man &apos;s grandfather was not afraid of the arctic night or the waving storm .
he swallowed out , put his pants down from seaside fur and defeated into his hand , and as the feces began to freeze them , he formed them into the shape of a knife .
he sprayed saliva on the sides of the fecological measurements , and when it was completely frozen , he amazed a dog with it .
he contains the dog and improvised a dish , took the dog &apos;s skeleton and improvised a bad dog , spanning another dog and swapped over the ice sheets with the colored knife on the belt .
this is not something you can do from anything .
and this , in many ways , is a symbol of the resistance of the inuit and all the indigences in the world .
the canadian government gave the inuit back in april 1999 complete control over an area greater than california and texas combined .
it &apos;s our new home country , it &apos;s called nunavut .
it &apos;s an independent area . you control all the minerals .
an amazing example , like a nation , a state that can seek and achieve reconciliation with its inhabitants .
and finally , i think it &apos;s pretty obvious , at least for those of us who &apos;ve traveled to these distant goals of the earth , to realize that they haven &apos;t even gone away .
you &apos;re someone &apos;s home countries .
they represent part of the human imagination that goes back in recent times , and for all of us , the dreams of these children , like the dreams of our own children , become part of the geography of hope .
what we &apos;re trying to do at national geographic is we think politicians never do anything .
we believe that polemics -- we believe that polemics are not persuasive , but we believe that storytelling can change the world , and so we &apos;re probably the best institution for storytelling in the world . our website gets 35 million hits every month .
156 nations are sending our tv channel .
our magazines are read by millions .
and we do a series of trips to the ethnosphere , where we take our audiences to places like this cultural wonder that they &apos;re dedicated by the laws , and hopefully , one by one , they &apos;re going to adopt the central revelation of anthropology : that this world has deserved to exist in different ways that we can find a possibility of life in a really multicultural , pluralistic world in which the wisdom of all people can contribute to our well-being .
thank you .
what i &apos;m going to first show you , as quickly as possible , is the fundamental work , a new technology that we have translated microsoft to be part of just one year ago , which is seadragon , and it &apos;s an environment in which it can either be locally or removed with huge amounts of visual data .
we see many , many gigabytes of digital photos here , which you can seamlessly bring forward , wasting , rearranging in any way .
and it doesn &apos;t matter how much information we &apos;re looking at , how big these collections are , or how big the images are .
most of you are digital photographs of a camera , but this one , for example , is a scan of the library of congress , and it &apos;s in a domain of 300 megapixels .
it doesn &apos;t make any difference , because the only thing that can limit the power of a system like this is the number of pixels on your screen every moment . it also has a very flexible architecture .
this is a whole book , an example of non-image data .
this is bleak house of thickens . every column is a chapter .
to prove that it &apos;s really a text and not an image , we can do something like that to really show that this is a real representation of texting and it &apos;s not an image .
maybe this is an artificial way of reading an e-book .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend it .
this is a realistic case . this is a guardian issue .
every big picture is the beginning of a section .
and that really gives you the pleasure and the good experience of reading a real paper copy or a newspaper , which is kind of a medium of several orders of magnitude .
we &apos;ve also done something on the corner of this particular issue of the guardian .
we &apos;ve designed a wrong ad with very high resolution , which is much higher than a normal ad , and we &apos;ve added additional content .
if you want to see the functions of this car , you can see it here .
or other models , or even technical specifications .
and this really captures these ideas , these constraints for the available place on the screen .
we hope that that means that &apos;s no longer the pop-ups and other nonsense -- that shouldn &apos;t be necessary .
of course , mapping is one of the really obvious applications for a technology like this .
and i don &apos;t really want to spend a lot of time here , except to say that we &apos;re going to be contributing to this .
but these are all the streets in the u.s.a .
compensate at the top of the earth in nasa &apos;s outrageous image .
let &apos;s get something else out of it now .
this is actually live on the internet now . you can check it out .
this is a project called photosynth that really connects two different technologies together .
one is seadragon , and the other is a very good research on computer vision , which from noah snavely , a university student at the university of washington , under the counseling of steve seitz at the uw .
and rick szeliski was done by microsoft research -- very good collaboration .
so this is live on the internet . it &apos;s driven by seadragon .
you can see this when we create these kinds of views where we can go through images and do this experience of several resolution .
but in fact , the spatial arrangement of the images here matters .
the computer vision-algorithms have summarized these images together so that they have the real space in which these recordings , all of which are played near the grassi lake in the canadian rockies , and they &apos;re seeing elements of stabilized slides or panoramic imaging , and these things have been put together all the space in relation to each other .
i don &apos;t know if i &apos;ve got time to show you other environments .
there are those that are much more spatial .
i &apos;d like to just go out and show you one of the original data sets of noah , and this is from an early prototype of photosynths that we &apos;ve been working on for the very first time in the summer to show you what i think is really the pointer behind this technology , which is photosynthetic technology , and this is not necessarily so obvious when you look at the environments that we have on the website .
we had to worry about the lawyers and so forth .
this is a reconstruction of the cathedral notre dame , who has just taken place in the computer with pictures of flickr . just give you notre dame in flickr , and you &apos;ll get pictures of men in the shirts and in the university countryside , and so on . each one of those orange clubs represents a picture that was detected as this model .
so these are all flickr pictures , and they &apos;re all in spatial terms of each other .
and we can navigate in this very simple way .
you know , i never believed that i was going to end up working at microsoft .
i &apos;m very grateful for reception here .
and i guess you can see that these are many different types of cameras : everything is being done by the mobile phone camera to professional slrs , a pretty large number of them all being swallowed together in this environment .
and if possible , i &apos;ll find some of the weird ones .
many of you are covered by faces , and so on .
somewhere here is a series of photographs -- here they are .
this is actually a poster of notre dame , which has been recorded properly .
we can move from the poster to a physical view of this environment .
the point here is that we can do things with the social environment . it &apos;s now collected data from all the -- from all the collective storage of what , visually , looks like the earth -- and everything &apos;s being connected .
