you know , one of the great reasoners in travel and one of the pleasures in ethnography research is to live with the people who remember themselves in the old days , who still feel their past in the wind , they touch on the rain , they taste them in the bitter leaves of the plants .
just knowing that jaguar-schamanas still travel beyond the milky way or the meaning of the myths of the world of inuit are still full of meaning , or that in the himalayas , the buddhists still follow the breath of the harma , the central openness of anthropology , which is the idea that the world that we live in is not only a model of customized , but the reality of our own generations .
and of course , we all share the same adaptation necessary .
we &apos;re all born . we bring kids to the world .
we run through initiational rituals .
we have to deal with the unstopping separation of death , and so it should not surprise us that we all sing , dance and art .
but what &apos;s interesting is the unique tongue of the love , the rhythm of the dance in every culture .
it doesn &apos;t matter whether it &apos;s the penan in the forests of borneo , or the voodoo akolyst in haiti , or the warrior in the caisut desert of north kenya , the curanderos in the anden , or a carawania in the middle of the sahara , which is happened to be a month ago , where i traveled to the desert , or a shepherd of the world of god .
all of these people teach us that there are other existing possibilities , other thinking , other ways of orienting on earth .
and that &apos;s an idea when you think about it , just one with hope .
together , the uncounted cultures of the world are creating a web of spiritual and cultural life that surrounded the earth , and for the way the earth might be as important as the biological lifespan that you know as a biosphere .
you can imagine this cultural life grid as a ethnosphere . ethnosphere can be defined as the total sum of all thoughts and dreams , myths , inspiration and intuitions that have been produced by human imagination since the beginning of consciousness .
ethnosphere is the great legacy of humanity .
it &apos;s the symbol of all of what we are and what we are capable of as an amazing wiss species .
and just like the biosphere , this happened with the ethnosphere -- just with even greater speed .
no biologist would argue , for example , that 50 percent or more of all of the species are dying in front of the extinction , because it &apos;s just not true . and yet , this -- the apocalyptian scenarium in the field of biological diversity -- is hardly what we know as optimistic scenarium in the area of cultural diversity .
and the crucial indicator for that is the extinction of languages .
when each of you were born in this room were talked about 6,000 languages on earth .
now , a language is not just the total of the vocabulary or a series of grammatoes .
a language is expression of the human mind .
it &apos;s a means where the soul of a particular culture is found access to the material world .
every language is like an ancient forest of the mind , a turning point , a thought , an ecosystem of spiritual possibilities .
and from these 6,000 languages today , while we &apos;re sitting here in monterey , just half of them are not whispered into the ears of kids .
they &apos;re not taught by little kids anymore . that means that if nothing is done , they &apos;re actually dead .
what could be more likely than being surrounded by switzerland , to be one of the last people who speak your language , have no way to pass the wisdom of ancestors , or to expect the hope of the children ?
and yet , this horrible destiny is actually happening somewhere on earth , about every two weeks , because every two weeks , an older person dies , and takes the last silent of an old language with grave .
and i know some of you say , &quot; isn &apos;t it better ? &quot; wouldn &apos;t the world be a better place if we all talk about a language ? &quot; and i say , &quot; well , let this language be yoruba . let &apos;s be canesic .
let me be a shoot . &quot;
and then you would suddenly see how it would be if you couldn &apos;t speak your own language .
so today , i want to take you on a journey through the ethnosphere , a quick journey through the ethnosphere to try to understand what has actually been lost .
now , there are some of us who have forgotten that , if i say , &quot; different possibilities of sone , &quot; really different possibilities of being one .
for example , take this kid of barasana in the north west of the amazon , the people of anakonda believe that they came up with the mythologically the milky river from the east .
this is a people who are not cognitive between the colors blue and green , because the himmelscene is different from the forest that people depend on .
they have a strange language , and a married talk called the linguistic exogy : you have to marry somebody who speaks a different language .
all of this root in the mythological past . the weird thing about these big houses that are talked about because of the mischehen six or seven languages , but is that you never hear someone who learns a language .
you just hear it , and then you start talking .
or , one of the most fascinating tribes i &apos;ve ever lived with , the waorani in the northeast of ecuador , an amazing people who was first contacted in 1958 .
in 1957 , five missionary contact and made a severe mistake .
they threw out of the air , which we would consider as a friendly gesture , and they forgot that these people from the rainforest in their lives had never seen anything two-dimensional .
they raised these photos from the forest floor , they tried to see behind the face or the character , they found nothing , and they concluded that this was the visitation cards of the devil and killed the five mixture with the speer .
but the orani didn &apos;t just kill the outstanding with the speer .
they went through each other .
54 percent of death accidents were cut by drops .
we followed geneaology eight generations , and we found two cases of a natural death , and when we asked people something about it , they gave them one of the people so old that he died because of his age , and we still killed him with the speer .
but at the same time , they had a clear knowledge of the forest that was amazing .
their hunters could smell the urine of an animal from 40 steps away , and determine what kind of animal had heard of this .
in the early &apos; 80s , i got a really amazing task when my professor at harvard asked me whether i was interested in going to haiti and film the secret societies that were the foundations of duvalier and tonton coutes , and the poison that was used for making zomes .
to give that sensation , i had to know something about this remarkable belief of the vodoun , and voodoo is not a cult of black magic .
on the contrary , it &apos;s a complex metaphysical view of the world .
it &apos;s interesting .
if i asked you to count the great worlds , what would you say ?
christentum , islam , buddhism , judaism or whatever .
a continent is always left , because the suspension was that there was no religious faith in sub-saharan africa , of course , and voodoo is just the remaining of this very profound religious thought that was overwhelmed during the tragic diaspora of slavery .
but what voodoo is so interesting is this vital relationship between the living and the dead .
the living bears the spirits .
the spirits can be complained from the great water , answers to the rhythm of the dance , to push the soul of the survivors of the life , so that acolyth is going to become a very short moment for god .
desperately , the voodooists like to say , &quot; your white goes to church and talk about god .
we dance in the temple and become god . &quot;
and because you &apos;re obsessed , you &apos;re taken by the mind . how can you hurt you ?
you see this amazing demonstrations : voodoo akolyths in a trancedent state , the light coal without burning , an amazing illustration of the ability to influence the body so that it &apos;s holding in a state of extremes .
well , from all the people i met were the zambia from sierra nevada de santa marta in northern columbia , the most extraordinary .
after that , the old tyrannian civilization , which populated the caribbean coast level of columbia , and in the consequence of the conquation , these people moved back into an isolated volcanic massive volcanic massive , which is rising above the caribbean coast level .
in a blooded continent , these people were the only people who never got obtained by spain .
until today &apos;s day , they &apos;re registered by a ritual priesthood , but the education of priesthood is very extraordinary .
the young acolyths are separated at the age of three and four years of their families , and in a shaped world of the finstar , in stone hills on the food of the glacier for 18 years , two lines of each other are selected by nine years to detect the nine months of pregnancy that they spent in their leisure mother , now they spend tamoric in the mother of the great mother .
and throughout that entire time , they &apos;re being introduced to the values of their society , values that claim that their prayers and their prayers , or we might say the ecological -- equilibrium .
at the end of this amazing initiation , they &apos;re suddenly taken outside and for the first time in their lives , in age 18 , they see a sunset . and in this critical moment of consciousness , when the sun begins to punch up on the open of the amazing landscape , suddenly everything they &apos;ve learned in abstract places , and the priests come back and says , &quot; how do you really tell you ? &quot;
it &apos;s so wonderful . you have to protect it . &quot;
they call themselves the older brothers and say that we are the younger brothers that we are responsible for the destruction of the world .
now this level of intuition is going to be very important .
every time we think of inflated and landscape , we either complained rousseau and the old framework of the noble wild , which is a rapid thought , or on the other hand , and say , these people are more connected to nature than us .
so , ingesture are not sentimental , or they &apos;re chosen by nostalgia .
it doesn &apos;t matter a lot of space in the malaria averseuts of asmat or the cold goodbye of tibet , but they still have shaped a mysterious nimbus of the earth that doesn &apos;t occur on the idea of being aware of it , but on a far more subtle intuition , the idea that the earth can only exist because they exist in consciousness .
well , what does that mean ?
it means that a little child from the anden who grows up in the belief that the mountain is an apu-mind that can be or your destiny , will have a different human relationship to this resource or this place , as a little child from montana , which will grow up in the belief that a mountain is a pile of rocks that can be carried .
whether it &apos;s a place of a mind or a bunch of error , irrelevant .
the interesting thing is the metaphor that defines the relationship between the individual and nature .
i grew up in the forests of british columbias , and i believed that these forests were there to be gered .
that made me a different person than my friends living under the kwakiutl who believe that these forests would occur to the local place of hukuk and the booming himmels and the cannibali spirits of the world , that they would be involved in their hamar initiation .
well , if you start to look at the idea that these cultures can create different realities , you can understand some of their extraordinary discoveries , like this plant here .
it &apos;s a photograph that i just recorded in the northwest of the amazon .
this is ayahuasca that many of you have heard about , the most powerful psychoactive preparat from the repertoire of the shame .
what ayahuasca makes so fascinating is not just the pharmaceutical potential of this preparate , but its processing . it &apos;s actually made out of two different sources . on one side , there &apos;s this higher lerne liane , which is a series of beaks , harmin , harmolin , easy hallucines , this climb is made of two different sources . it &apos;s just like a blueprint of consciousness , but it &apos;s made out of the plant .
this plant contains some very strong tryptamins that serotonin , dimethanytryptamin five and methoxydimethane tryptamin are very similar .
if you &apos;ve seen the yanomami , as you &apos;ve seen this stuff , this substance that contains them from different ways also contains methoxdimetryptamin .
this pud to nut is about the same as being cut out of a gun , surrounded by barocken paintings , and the landing on a sea of electricity .
it &apos;s not generated by reality , but the resolution of reality .
i &apos;ve even done with my professor , richard evan shultes , the man who could hire the psychedelian estate with the discovery of the magic mushroom in mexico in the 300s , talking about it . i claim that you couldn &apos;t put these tryptamins as hallucinatory , because at the moment you feel the effects , you &apos;re not there anymore to experience hallucination .
but the thing with tryptamins is that they can &apos;t be taken into the limb , because , of course , through a human gut of course , the enzyme of monoxidase , denatuated .
you can only be mixed with some other chemicals that the mao denatulate .
now the fascinating thing is that the betakarboline that contains in the liane , the mao-inhibitors of exactly the way the tryptamine is necessary . so ask themselves .
how can these people come from a flora of 80,000 species of adstringier plants find these two morphologically unrelated plants that are combined when combined in this way , create a kind of biochemical version , so that the whole thing is bigger than the sum of its parts ?
we use this great euphemism , try and error , which is meaningless .
but you ask the indians , &quot; the plant speaks to us . &quot;
so , what does that mean ?
this tribe , the cofan , have 17 variants of ayahuasca , which you all recognize in a large distance in the forest that seems like a way .
and then you ask them how they do their taxonomy , and they say , &quot; i thought you know something about plants .
i mean , you don &apos;t know anything ? &quot; and i said , &quot; no . &quot;
so , it turns out you take each of the 17 variants in the full moon , and you sing them to one in a variety of tons .
well , that doesn &apos;t give you a ph.d. at harvard , but it &apos;s much more interesting than counting tribe .
well , the problem is that even those of us who have sympathy for the hard position of the content , they &apos;re looking at orginically and colorful , but they &apos;re sort of constrained in the past , while the real world , that &apos;s where our world is going .
so , the fact is that in the 20th century , you will remember not for your war or technological innovations , but more than an era that we were against , and the massive destruction of biological and cultural diversity on earth is either active or passive . so the problem is not the change .
all cultures have been involved in the dance of new life .
and the problem is not the technology itself .
the sioux indians didn &apos;t hear less about being sioux when they &apos;re bow and arrow , when americans stopped being americans when they &apos;re driving horse and horses .
not change and technology threatened the integrity of ethnosphere . it &apos;s power . the ugly face of rule .
and wherever you see in the world , you &apos;ll discover that these cultures are not seen in the process , and these are dynamic living peoples , whose existence of insight forces , which are embedded by their capacity of adapting adaptation , whether it &apos;s the unprecedented decrease in the country of the country in the country of the country of the country , a madenial of south asia , of sardining out of saria , where it &apos;s now floating away from the sea .
or if we go to the mountains of tibet , where i get a lot of fork , you &apos;ll see the ugly face of political dominance .
you know , the genocide , the physical extinction of people is generally convicted , but the ethnocid , the destruction of people , is not only convicted , but generally , and multiplied as part of a developing strategy .
and you can &apos;t understand the suffering when you haven &apos;t seen it at the bottom level .
i went to lhasa young colleague 6,000 miles of chengdu in west china transformed by sweet tibet to lhasa , and only when i saw the face behind lhasa , i saw the statistics behind them . 6,000 sacred monuents that were transformed into shoe and astrian . 1,2 million people who were murdered during the cultural revolution of the castones .
the father of this young man was identified as a panel lama .
that meant that in the chinese invasion , he was installed .
his uncle flew with her sacrifice into the diaspora that brought people to nepal .
his mother was performed as a punishment for his mother -- to be wealthy for crimes .
he was cut into jail at the age of two years to hide under her rockcipboard , because she couldn &apos;t live without him .
the nurse who did this tape was put into an education camp .
one day , she went out to see a armband of maos , and for that overhead , she had to go into a hard work camp for seven years .
suffering can be inadequate , but the pervasive mind of people is something unforgotten .
and at the end , we &apos;re really standing in a choice . do we want to live in a monochromatic world of monotonia or in a polymatic world of diversity ?
margaret mead , the great anthropologist , before she died , said that it &apos;s their greatest fear that while we moved towards a subject , elderly , generic worldview , we would not only reduced the whole bandwidth of human imagination in a memorized way , but that someday we &apos;ve forgotten that there have ever been other possibilities .
and it &apos;s humbling to think that maybe our species have existed for 600,000 years .
the neolithic revolution that brought us agriculture , and at that moment the cult of the saatcorn underwarf , who put the poetry of the shame through the prosa of priestership and hierarchy , specialization and overlap -- just 10,000 years ago .
modern industrial world as we know it is hardly 300 years old .
well , this surface story doesn &apos;t tell me that we all have answers to the challenges that we face in the next millennia .
when we ask these uncountless world cultures about the meaning of human being , they respond to 10,000 different voices .
and in this song , we &apos;re going to rediscover the opportunity to be what we are : people with people with people who are aware of the importance that all people and gardless have to be able to face a space . and there are great moments of optimism .
here &apos;s a picture i took on the north end of the baffin islands when i went to the narwhal jagd , and this man , olaya , told me a wonderful story of his grandfather .
the canadian government didn &apos;t always go very well with the inuit and during the 50th years in the establishment of our rule , they were forced to pull in settlements .
the grandfather of this old man refused .
the family who was afraid of his life took all the guns and all the tools .
now you have to know that the inuit doesn &apos;t have fear of the cold . they used it to their advantage .
the glimpses of their bad ones were originally made from fish that was put in caribbui skin .
the grandfather of the man didn &apos;t fear himself before the arctic night or the weather storm .
he came out , he put down his pants from seventh sfell down and defeated in his hand , and when the feces started freezing them into the shape of a measurement .
he sprayed storage on the side of the coloral measurement , and when it was completely frozen , he was amazed a dog with it .
he contains the dog and improvised the dog &apos;s face , took the skeleton of the dog &apos;s dog and improvised a bad dog , spanned a different dog and swallowed over the ice sheets .
this is how you can do something from nothing .
and in many ways , this is a symbol of the inuit resistance and all the inuit in the world .
the canadian government gave the inuit in april 1999 the complete control of an area that &apos;s bigger than california and texas .
it &apos;s our new home land , and it &apos;s called nunavut .
it &apos;s an independent area . they control all the minerals .
an amazing example of how a nation , a state who can look at regutmachation with his apartners and reach .
and finally , i think it &apos;s pretty obvious , at least for those of us who have traveled to these distant goals of the planet , to realize that they &apos;re not removed at all .
they &apos;re the home countries of somebody .
they represent parts of the human imagination that go back in the past times , and for all of us , the dreams of our children become part of the geography of hope .
what we &apos;re trying to do at national geographic is we think politicians are never going to achieve anything .
we believe that polemics -- we think polemics is not convincing , but we believe that storytelling can change the world , and so we &apos;re probably the best institution for storytelling in the world . our website gets 35 million hits every month .
156 nations send our tv channel .
our magazines are read by millions .
and we &apos;re entering a series of travel in the ethnosphere where where we &apos;re looking at our audience in places like this cultural wonder that we can find an opportunity from the laws of the world , and hopefully , after one of the other , they &apos;re going to take the central openness of anthropology : that this world deserves to exist in different ways that we can find a really multicultural world in a really multicultural world where people are in our well-being .
thank you very much .
what i &apos;m going to show you first is the basic work , a new technology that we have microsoft as part of a year ago , which is seadragon . and it &apos;s an environment where they can either deal with local or removed with vast amounts of visual data .
we see many , many gigabytes of digital photos here , which you get down and forth , turn on , in any way , can rearrange .
and it doesn &apos;t matter how much information we &apos;re looking at , how big these collections are , or how big the images are .
for example , most of you are digital photos of a camera , but this is a scan of congresslibrary , and it &apos;s in an area of 300 megapix .
it doesn &apos;t make any difference , because the only thing that the performance of a system like this is the number of pixels on your screen at every moment . it &apos;s also a very flexible architecture .
this is a whole book , an example of non-image data .
this is bleak house of thickens . every column is a chapter .
and to prove that it &apos;s really a text , and it &apos;s not a picture , we can do something like this , to really show that this is a real representation of texts , and it &apos;s not a picture .
maybe this is an artificial way to read an e-book .
i wouldn &apos;t recommend it .
this is a realistic case . this is a copy of the guardian .
every big picture is the beginning of a seed .
and that really gives you the pleasure and the good experience of reading a real paper paper journal or a newspaper , which is a kind of a medium with a majority of magnitude .
we also did something about the corner of the guardian .
we &apos;ve designed a wrong ad with very high resolution that &apos;s much higher than a normal display , and we &apos;ve added additional content .
if you want to see the functions of this car , you can see here .
or other models , or even technical specifications .
and this really reaches these ideas to create these limitations for the available place on the screen .
we hope that this doesn &apos;t mean pop-ups and other nonsense -- it should not be necessary .
of course , the mapping is one of the really obvious applications for a technology like this .
and i don &apos;t really want to spend a lot of time here , except to say that we &apos;re also going to be contributed to this area .
but these are all the streets in the u.s.a .
conversely , on the top of nasa eradicated .
now let &apos;s get something else out .
this is actually live on the internet . you can check it out .
this is a project called photosynth , which really connects two different technologies together .
one is seadragon , and the other is a very good research on computer vision that from noah snavely , a university student in washington , under the beration of steve silk at uw at uw .
and rick szeliski was done by microsoft research . a very good collaboration .
so this is live on the internet . it &apos;s driven by seadragon .
you can see that when we create these kinds of views where we can go through images , and make this experience of the majority resolution .
but the wheels of the images are actually important here .
the computer vision algorithms have put these pictures together so that they &apos;ve held the real space where these images , which are all made near the grassi lakes in the canadian rockies , and you can see elements of stabilized dias or panoric imagery , and all of these things were transformed in relation to each other .
i don &apos;t know if i have time to show you other environments .
there are those who are much more wheels .
i &apos;d like to show you one of the original data sentences of noah , and this is from an early prototype of photosynth that we &apos;ve been working on in the first summer to show you what i think it &apos;s really the point behind this technology , photosyn-technology , and this isn &apos;t quite so obvious if you look at the environments that we &apos;ve been looking at on the website .
we had to worry about the lawyers and so on .
this is a reconstruction of the cathedrale notre dame , who eventually succeeded in the computer with images of flickr . just give notre dame in flickr , and they get pictures of men in t-shirts and universities , and so on , each of these orange clubs represent a picture that was discovered to this model .
so these are all flickle pictures , and they &apos;re all standing in this way .
and we can navigate in this very simple way .
and you know , i never thought i &apos;m going to work at microsoft .
i &apos;m very grateful for the reception here .
and i guess you can see that these are many different kinds of cameras : everything is about the handy-camera to the professional slrs , a pretty large number of them that have been put together in this environment .
and if possible , i &apos;ll find some of the strange ones .
many of them are covered by faces and so on .
somewhere here is a series of photographs -- here you are .
this is actually a poster of notre dame that was recorded right .
we can change from the poster to a physical view of this environment .
the point here is that we can do things with the social environment , and it &apos;s now collected data from all of these -- from the collective memory of what visual the earth looks like -- and everything is connected .
